README.md, before:

# Submarine Bridge Simulator (MVP)

A cooperative, local-multiplayer submarine bridge simulator. Five players occupy classic stations on a nuclear attack submarine and must coordinate under time pressure, conflicting objectives, and imperfect information. The backend runs an authoritative 20 Hz sim loop; the frontends are lightweight station UIs served from one host.

## What this is
- A real-time sim of ownship kinematics, acoustics, weapons, and damage/engineering.
- A five-station experience designed to create tension and immersion via power/noise budgets, maintenance/failure mechanics, and EMCON tradeoffs.
- An offline-friendly architecture with optional AI “enemy” control in the future.

## Roles and Stations

### Captain
- Grants firing consent (time-limited window), raises/lowers periscope and radio masts (EMCON risk).
- Receives the mission brief and Rules of Engagement (ROE).
- Monitors EMCON state: sees noise budget and detectability.

### Helm
- Steers and drives the ship: heading, speed, depth.
- Must respect cavitation and thermocline to manage acoustic signature.
- Responds to power caps; speed may be limited by Engineering’s allocations.

### Sonar
- Tracks passive contacts (bearing-only) with noisy bearings and confidence accumulation.
- Triggers active pings (cooldown). Active returns appear as bright dots on the DEMON waterfall and in a Ping Responses list (bearing, estimated range, strength, timestamp). Pings increase counter-detection risk.
- Manages classification/marking flow to support Weapons’ firing solution quality (future).

### Weapons
- Manages tubes: load → flood → doors → fire. Tube timers and interlocks apply.
- Requires Captain consent to fire (if enabled). Power allocation affects tube timing.
- Receives solution inputs (bearing/run depth) and monitors timers/door states.

### Engineering
- Allocates reactor power budget across Helm (propulsion), Sonar (sensors), Weapons, and Engineering (maintenance).
- Manages reactor output, SCRAM, pumps; tracks battery, flooding, and hull damage.
- Oversees maintenance levels per system (rudder, ballast, sonar, radio, periscope, tubes). Neglect causes failures (e.g., lost rudder authority, limited ballast rate, sensor outages). Allocating power to Engineering recovers maintenance over time.
- Balances acoustic noise budget: pumps, cavitation, and raised masts increase detectability.

## Core Mechanics
- Authoritative 20 Hz sim loop integrates kinematics, sonar (passive/active), weapons, and damage/engineering.
- Acoustic noise budget affects detectability; EMCON risk is surfaced to Captain and Sonar.
- Shared power budget forces tradeoffs across propulsion, sensors, weapons, and maintenance.
- Maintenance/failure model: low maintenance degrades or disables systems; recovery requires sustained Engineering allocation.
- Active sonar pings: cooldown-limited, with responses rendered and listed; trigger counter-detection events.

## Debug and Missions
- Debug view provides a live truth map of entities.
- Restart Mission button resets world state.
- Mission selector (scaffold) for presets with initial ship types/positions, captain brief text, and timed radio traffic (future expansion).


## Requirements
- Python 3.11+

## Setup
```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Run
```bash
uvicorn sub-bridge.backend.app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

Open:
- http://localhost:8000/
- http://localhost:8000/captain
- http://localhost:8000/helm
- http://localhost:8000/sonar
- http://localhost:8000/weapons
- http://localhost:8000/engineering

LAN access: http://192.168.1.100:8000/ (adjust to your host IP)

Commit message:

tests: add compass bearing and restart mission tests; docs: clarify bearing convention and restart policy

README.md, after:

# Submarine Bridge Simulator (MVP)

A cooperative, local-multiplayer submarine bridge simulator. Five players occupy classic stations on a nuclear attack submarine and must coordinate under time pressure, conflicting objectives, and imperfect information. The backend runs an authoritative 20 Hz sim loop; the frontends are lightweight station UIs served from one host.

## What this is
- A real-time sim of ownship kinematics, acoustics, weapons, and damage/engineering.
- A five-station experience designed to create tension and immersion via power/noise budgets, maintenance/failure mechanics, and EMCON tradeoffs.
- An offline-friendly architecture with optional AI “enemy” control in the future.

## Roles and Stations

### Captain
- Grants firing consent (time-limited window), raises/lowers periscope and radio masts (EMCON risk).
- Receives the mission brief and Rules of Engagement (ROE).
- Monitors EMCON state: sees noise budget and detectability.

### Helm
- Steers and drives the ship: heading, speed, depth.
- Must respect cavitation and thermocline to manage acoustic signature.
- Responds to power caps; speed may be limited by Engineering’s allocations.

### Sonar
- Tracks passive contacts (bearing-only) with noisy bearings and confidence accumulation.
- Triggers active pings (cooldown). Active returns appear as bright dots on the DEMON waterfall and in a Ping Responses list (bearing, estimated range, strength, timestamp). Pings increase counter-detection risk.
- Manages classification/marking flow to support Weapons’ firing solution quality (future).

### Weapons
- Manages tubes: load → flood → doors → fire. Tube timers and interlocks apply.
- Requires Captain consent to fire (if enabled). Power allocation affects tube timing.
- Receives solution inputs (bearing/run depth) and monitors timers/door states.

### Engineering
- Allocates reactor power budget across Helm (propulsion), Sonar (sensors), Weapons, and Engineering (maintenance).
- Manages reactor output, SCRAM, pumps; tracks battery, flooding, and hull damage.
- Oversees maintenance levels per system (rudder, ballast, sonar, radio, periscope, tubes). Neglect causes failures (e.g., lost rudder authority, limited ballast rate, sensor outages). Allocating power to Engineering recovers maintenance over time.
- Balances acoustic noise budget: pumps, cavitation, and raised masts increase detectability.

## Core Mechanics
- Authoritative 20 Hz sim loop integrates kinematics, sonar (passive/active), weapons, and damage/engineering.
- Acoustic noise budget affects detectability; EMCON risk is surfaced to Captain and Sonar.
- Shared power budget forces tradeoffs across propulsion, sensors, weapons, and maintenance.
- Maintenance/failure model: low maintenance degrades or disables systems; recovery requires sustained Engineering allocation.
- Active sonar pings: cooldown-limited, with responses rendered and listed; trigger counter-detection events.

### Bearings
- The sim uses compass bearings: 0°=North, 90°=East, 180°=South, 270°=West. If ownship is at (0,0) heading 000 and another ship is at (x>0, y=0), its true bearing is ~090.

## Debug and Missions
- Debug view provides a live truth map of entities.
- Restart Mission button resets world state.
- Mission selector (scaffold) for presets with initial ship types/positions, captain brief text, and timed radio traffic (future expansion).


## Requirements
- Python 3.11+

## Setup
```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Run
```bash
uvicorn sub-bridge.backend.app:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

Open:
- http://localhost:8000/
- http://localhost:8000/captain
- http://localhost:8000/helm
- http://localhost:8000/sonar
- http://localhost:8000/weapons
- http://localhost:8000/engineering

LAN access: http://192.168.1.100:8000/ (adjust to your host IP)
